THE FIRST HOUR*

O come, let us worship God our King. O come, let us worship and
fall down before Christ, our King and our God. O come, let us worship
and fall down before the Very Christ, our King and our God. {Three
reverences. )

Psalm v.

Ponder my words, O Lord, consider my meditation. O hearken thou
unto the voice of my calling, my King, and my God : for unto thee will
I make my prayer. My voice shalt thou hear betimes, O Lord ; early
in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up.
For thou art the God that hast no pleasure in wickedness ; neither shall
any evil dwell with thee. Such as be foolish shall not stand in thy
sight ; for thou hatest all them that work vanity. Thou shalt destroy
them that speak lies : the Lord will abhor both the blood-thirsty and
deceitful man. But as for me, I will come into thine house, even upon
the multitude of thy mercy ; and in thy fear will I worship toward thy
holy temple. Lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousness, because of mine
enemies ; make thy way plain before my face. For there is no faith-
fulness in his mouth; their inward parts are very wickedness. Their
throat is an open sepulchre ; they flatter with their tongue. Destroy
thou them, O God ; let them perish through their own imaginations ;
cast them out in the multitude of their ungodliness ; for they have rebelled
against thee. And let all them that put their trust in thee rejoice : they
shall ever be giving of thanks, because thou defendest them ; they that
love thy Name shall be joyful in thee ; for thou, Lord, wilt give thy
blessing unto the righteous, and with thy favourable kindness wilt thou
defend him, as with a shield.

Psalm xc.
Lord, thou hast been our refuge, from one generation to another.
Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the
world were made, thou art God from everlasting, and world without
end. Thou turnest man to destruction ; again thou sayest, Come again,
ye children of men. For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yes-
terday ; seeing that is past as a watch in the night. As soon as thou
scatterest them they are even as a sleep; and fade away suddenly like
the grass. In the morning it is green, and groweth up ; but in the
evening it is cut down, dried up, and withered. For we consume away
in thy displeasure, and are afraid at thy wrathful indignation. Thou
hast set our misdeeds before thee ; and our secret sins in the light of thy
countenance. For when thou art angry all our days are gone : we bring

* See Appendix B, III.


THE FIRST HOUR 39

our years to an end, as it were a tale that is told. The days of our age
are threescore years and ten ; and though men be so strong that they
come to fourscore years, yet is their strength then but labour and sor-
row ; so soon passeth it away, and we are gone. But who regardeth
the power of thy wrath ? for even thereafter as a man feareth, so is thy
displeasure. So teach us s to number our days, that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom. Turn thee again, O Lord, at the last, and be gra-
cious unto thy servants. O satisfy us with thy mercy, and that soon :
so shall we rejoice and be glad all the days of our life. Comfort us again
now after the time that thou hast plagued us; and for the years
wherein we have suffered adversity. Show thy servants thy work, and
their children thy glory. And the glorious Majesty of the Lord our
God be upon us : prosper thou the work of our hands upon us ; O pros-
per thou our handy-work.

Psalm ci.

My song shall be of mercy and judgment ; unto thee, O Lord, will I
sing. O let me have understanding in the way of godliness ! When
wilt thou come unto me? I will walk in my house with a perfect heart.
I will take no wicked thing in hand ; I hate the sins of unfaithfulness ;
there shall no such cleave unto me. A f roward heart shall depart from
me ; I will not know a wicked person. Whoso privily slandereth his
neighbour, him will I destroy. Whoso hath also a proud look and high
stomach, I will not suffer him. Mine eyes look upon such as are faith-
ful in the land, that they may dwell with me. Whoso leadeth a godly
life, he shall be my servant. There shall no deceitful person dwell in
my house ; he that telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight. I shall soon
destroy all the ungodly that are in the land ; that I may root out all
wicked doers from the city of the Lord.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now,
and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to thee, O God. {Thrice; three
reverences.)

Lord, have mercy. {Thrice.)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.

Then the Hymn (Trop&r)for the Day, in the proper Tone, is read.*

Now, and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Hymn to the Birth-giver of God {Bogorbditehcri).

What shall we call thee, O thou who art full of grace ? Heaven, for
from thee shone forth the Sun of Righteousness ; Paradise, for thou
hast budded forth the Flower of Immortality ; Virgin, for thou hast
remained undefiled : Pure Mother, for thou hast held in thy holy em-
brace thy Son, who is God of all. Beseech thou him that he will save
our souls.

* For the Hymns in the Eight tones, see Appendix A.


40


THE FIRST HOUR


3


But if it be during Great Fast (Lent), we say the Hymn ( Tropdr) in Tone VI,

Then: O hearken thou betimes unto the voice of my calling,
my King and my God.

Verse {Stikh) i : Ponder my words, O Lord : consider my medi-
tation.

Verse 2 : For unto thee will I make my prayer.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now,
and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

And again the Hymn to the Birth-giver of God: What shall we call thee :

Order my steps in thy word, and so shall no wickedness have do-
minion over me. O deliver me from the wrongful dealings of men, and
so shall I keep thy commandments. Show the light of thy countenance
upon thy servant, and teach me thy statutes.

Let my mouth be filled with thy praise, O Lord, that I may sing of
thy glory and honour all the day long.

O Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Immortal One, have mercy upon
us. {Thrice,)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now, and
ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

O all-holy Trinity, have mercy upon us. O Lord, wash away our
sins. O Master, pardon our transgressions. O Holy One, visit and heal
our infirmities, for thy Name's sake.

Lord, have mercy. {Thrice,)

Our Father, who art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy king-
dom come. Thy will be done on earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this
day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive those
who trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation ; But deliver
us from the Evil One :

Priest For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and
unto ages of ages.

Amen.

If it be not the Great Fast (Lentl the Collect-Hymn (Kmddk) of the Tone, or
of the Saint for the Day, or of the approaching Feast, is then read, 9

But if it be the Great Fast, or if there be no special Collect-Hymn, on Mon-
day, Tuesday and Thursday, the following Hymn to the Birth-giver
of God (Bogordditchen) shall be read:

With heart and lips let us continually magnify the glorious
Mother of God, more holy than the Angels, confessing her to be the
true Birth-giver of God, who did, in very truth, bring forth God
incarnate, and who unceasingly doth intercede for our souls.
But on Wednesday and Friday the following shall be read:
Speedily prevent, ere he lead us into captivity, the enemy which
* For Collect-Hymns for the Twelve Great Feasts, see the Special Services.


5


THE FIRST HOUR


4i


3


blasphemeth thee and constraineth us, O Christ our God : Over-
come by thy Cross those who war against us, that they may know
what power hath the faith of Orthodox believers ; through the inter-
cessions of the Birth-giver -of God, O thou who alone lovest man-
kind.

On Saturday the following shall bf said:

Unto thee, O Lord, the Author of Creation, the universe doth
offer the God-bearing martyrs as the first-fruits of nature. By
whose supplications, through the Birth-giver of God, do thou pre-
serve in peace profound thy Church, which is thine estate, O most
merciful One.

Lord, have mercy. {Forty times,)

Thou who, at all times, and at every hour, both in heaven and on
earth, art worshipped and glorified, O Christ our God, long-suffering
and plenteous in mercy and compassion ; who lovest the just and
showest mercy to those who are hardened in sin ; who callest all men
to repentance through the promise of good things to come : Do thou,
the same Lord, receive also our supplications at this present time, and
direct our lives according to thy commandments. Sanctify our souls ;
purify our bodies; set aright our minds; and deliver us from all calamity,
wrath and distress. Compass us round about with thy holy Angels ;
that, guided and guarded by their host, we may attain unto the unity
of the faith, and unto the comprehension of thine ineffable glory. For
blessed art thou unto ages of ages. Amen.

Glory to the Father, And to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now,
and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

More honourable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more
glorious than the Seraphim, thou who without defilement barest God
the Word, true Birth-giver of God, we magnify thee.

In the Name of the Lord bless, Father.

Priest. God be bountiful unto us, and bless us, and show us the light
of his countenance, and be merciful unto us.

And if it be the Great Fast, we make three great reverences to the earthy
reciting the prescribed

Prayer of St. Ephraim the Syrian.

O Lord and Master of my life, grant not unto me a spirit of
slothfulness, of discouragement, of lust of power, of vain babbling.
{Reverenced)

But vouchsafe unto thy servant the spirit of continence, of meek-
ness, of patience, and of love {Reverence.)

Yea, O Lord and King, grant that I may perceive my own trans-
gressions, and judge not my brother. For blessed art thou unto
ages of ages. Amen. {Reverence. Then twelve lesser reverences^
saying at each : Q God, cleanse thou me, a sinner. Then the whole
Prayer is repeated; with one great reverence in conclusion.)


42 THE FIRST HOUR

O Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Immortal One, have mercy
upon us. {Thrice.)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now,
and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

O all-holy Trihity, have mercy upon us. O Lord, wash away our
sins. O Master, pardon our transgressions. O Holy One, visit and
heal our infirmities, for thy Name's sake.

Lord, have mercy. {Thrice.)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now, and
ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Our Father, who art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy king-
dom come. Thy will be done on earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this
day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive those
who trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation ; But deliver
us from the Evil One :

Priest For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the. glory, of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and
unto ages of ages.

Reader, Amen. Lord, have mercy. {Twelve times.)

And this Prayer :

O Christ, the true Light, whicJh illumineth and sanctifieth every man
who cometh into th^ world ! Let the light of thy countenance be showed
upon us, that in it we may behold the light ineffable ; and guide our
footsteps aright, to the keeping of thy commandments ; through the
intercessions of thine all-pure Mother, and of all the Saints. Amen.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now, and
ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Lord, have mercy. ( Thrice,) Bless.

Priest, Through the prayers of our holy Fathers, O Lord Jesus
Christ, have mercy upon us.

Hymn to the Birth-giver of God {Bogorbditchen).

We, thy servants, in that we have been delivered from calamities,
do offer unto thee, O Birth-giver of God, who as victorious Chieftain
warrest for us, songs of triumph and thanksgiving : Do thou also, in
that thou hast might invincible, free us from all assaults, that we may
cry unto thee : Hail, O Bride unwedded !

Priest, Glory to thee, O Lord, our hope ; glory to thee.

Choir. Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now, and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Lord, have mercy. {Thrice.) Bless.

Benediction.

Priest. May Christ, our true God, through the prayers of his all-
pure Mother ; of the holy, glorious and all-laudable Apostles {and of


THE THIRD HOUR 43

the Saint to whom the church is dedicated; and of the Saint for the
day) ; of the holy ancestors of God, Joachim and Anna ; and of all the
Saints, have mercy upon us, and save us : for he is gracious and he
alone loveth mankind

Choir. Lord, have mercy. {Thrice.)
