THE ALL-NIGHT VIGIL SERVICE (i)*

The Holy Doors are open. The Priest stands before the Altar with the censer, and
the Deacon with the taper.

GREAT VESPERS

Deacon. Arise, Master, give the blessing.

Priest Glory to the Holy, Consubstantial, Life-giving and Undi-
vided Trinity always, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages. (2)

Choir. Amen.

Priest. 'O come, let us worship God our King. O come, let us wor-
ship and fall down before Christ, our King and our God. O come, let
us worship and fall down before the Very Christ, our King and our
God. O come, let us worship and fall down before him. {Three rever-
ences.)

From Easter until Ascension Day, in place of O come, let us worship, shall be
sung:

Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down Death by death, Bacttr-
and upon those in the tomb bestowing life. tUi '

Then shall be said or sung Psalm civ. ; and the Priest^ preceded by the Deacon
bearing a taper, shall cense the whole temple, after which the HoHy Door is
closed. (3)


Psalm civ.
Praise the Lord, O my
soul. Blessed art thou, O
Lord. O Lord my God,
thou art become exceed-
ing glorious. Blessed art
thou, O Lord. In wisdom
hast thou made them all.
Glory to thee, O Lord,
who hast made them all.

Thus much is generally used.
But sometimes the whole is
read or sung, as follow-
eth;

Praise the Lord, O my
soul : O Lord my God,


The Priest now taketh his stand before the
Holy Door, with head uncovered, and recit-
eth the Prayers of Light, secretly. (4)

A.

O Lord, bountiful and compassionate,
long-suffering and plenteous in mercy,
give ear unto our prayer, and attend to
the voice of our supplication. Work
upon us a sign for good. Lead us in thy
way, that we may walk in thy truth.
Make glad our hearts, that we may fear
thy holy Name, For thou art great and
doest wonders. Thou alone art God,
and among all the gods there is none
like unto thee, O Lord, mighty in
mercy, gracious in strength, to aid and


r


* For an explanation of the SymbolUm indicated by reference-numerals in the text, see
Appendix B, I.


THE ALL-NIGHT VIGIL SERVICE


thou art become exceed-
ing glorious ; thou art
clothed with majesty and
honour. Thou deckest
thyself with light as it
were with a garment, and
spreadest out the heavens
like a curtain. Who lay-
eth the beams of his cham-
bers in the waters, and
maketh the clouds his
chariot, and walketh upon
the wings of the wind.
He maketh his angels spir-
its, and his ministers a
flaming fire. He laid the
foundations of the earth,
that it never should move
at any time. Thou cover-
edst it with the deep like
as a garment ; the waters
stand in the hills. At thy
reriuke they flee ; at the
voice of thy thunder they
are afraid. Tbey go up as
high as the hills, and down
to the valleys beneath;
even unto the place which
thou hast appointed for
them. Thou hast set them
their bounds, which they
shall not pass, neither turn
again to cover the earth.
He sendeth the springs
into the rivers, which run
among the hills. All the
beasts of the field drink
thereof, and the wild asses
quench their thirst. Be-
side them shall the fowls
of the air have their hab-
itation, and sing among
the branches. He water-
eth the hills from above;
the earth is filled with the
fruit of thy works. He


to comfort and save all those who put
their trust in thy holy Name.

For unto thee are due all glory, honour
and worship, to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now, and
ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

B.

O Lord, rebuke us not in thy displea-
sure, neither chasten us in thy wrath :
but deal with us according to thy mercy,
O Physician and Healer of our souls.
Guide us unto the haven of thy will.
Enlighten the eyes of our hearts to the
knowledge of thy truth, and vouchsafe
that the residue of this day and our
whole life may be peaceful and without
sin ; through the intercessions of the
holy Birth-giver of God, and of all the
Saints.

For thine is the majesty, and thine
are the kingdom and the power and the
glory, of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit, now, and ever,
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

c.

O Lord our God, remember us sin-
ners and thine unprofitable servants
when we call upon thy holy Name, and
put us not to shame in our expectation
of thy mercy : but grant us, O Lord,
all our petitions which are unto salva-
tion, and vouchsafe that we may love
and fear thee with all our hearts, and
do thy will in all things.

For thou art a gracious God, and
lovest mankind : and unto thee do we
ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now, and
ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

D.

O thou who, with never-silent hymns
and never-ceasing songs of praise to thy
glory, art hymned by the holy Powers:
Fill our mouths with thy praise, that we


GREAT VESPERS


bringeth forth grass for
the cattle, and green herb
for the service of men ;
That he may bring food
out of the earth, and wine
that maketh glad the heart
of man : and oil to make him
a cheerful countenance,
and bread to strengthen
man's heart. The trees of
the Lord also are full of
sap, even the cedars of Li-
banus which he hath plant-
ed ; . wherein the birds
make their nests ; and the
fir-trees are a dwelling for
the stork. The high hills
are a refuge for the wild
goats; and so are the stony
rocks for the conies. He
appointed the moon for
certain seasons, and the
sun knoweth his going
down. Thou makest dark-
ness that it may be night;
wherein all the beasts of
the forests do move. The
lions, roaring after their
prey, do seek their meat
from God. The sun aris-
eth and they get them away
together, and lay them
down in their dens. Man
goeth forth to his work,
and to his labour, until
the evening. O Lord, how
manifold are thy works!
in wisdom hast thou made
them all ; the earth is full
of thy riches. So is the
great and wide sea also;
wherein are creeping
things innumerable, both
small and great beasts.
There go the ships, and
there is that Leviathan,


may magnify thy holy Name. And grant
unto us part and inheritance with all
those who fear thee in truth and keep
thy commandment ; through the inter-
cessions of the holy Birth-giver of God,
and of all thy Saints.

For unto thee are due all glory, honour
and worship, to, the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now, and
ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.


O Lord, Lord, who upholdest all
things in the all-pure hollow of thy hand;
who showest long-suffering upon us all,
and repentest thee at our calamities:
Remember thy bounties and thy mercy.
Visit us with thy loving-kindness: and
grant that, through the residue of thy
day, by thy grace, we may avoid the
divers subtle snares of the Evil One,
and preserve our lives unassailed ;
through the grace of thine all-holy Spirit.

Through the mercy and love toward
mankind of thine Only-begotten Son,
with whom thou art blessed, together
with thine all-holy, and good, and life-
creating Spirit, now, and ever, and unto
ages of ages. Amen.


O God, great and wonderful, who with
wisdom inscrutable and great riches of
providence orderest all things, and be-
stowest upon us earthly good things ; who
hast given us a pledge of the promised
kingdom through the good things already
bestowed upon us, and hast made us to
shun all evil during that part of the day
which is past : Grant that we may also
fulfil the residue of this day without
reproach before thy holy glory, and hymn
thee, the only good one, our God, who
lovest mankind.

For thou art our God, and unto thee
we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to


r


THE ALI^NIGHT VIGIL SERVICE


whom thou hast made to
take his pastime therein.
These all wait upon thee,
that thou mayest give
them meat in due season.
When thou givest it them,
they gather it; and when
thou openest thy hand,
they are filled with good.
When thou hidest thy
face, they are troubled;
when thou takest away
their breath, they die, and
are turned again to their
dust. When thou lettest
thy breath go forth, they
shall be made: the Lord
shall rejoice in his works.
The earth shall tremble at
the look of him ; if he do
but touch the hills, they
shall smoke. I will sing
unto the Lord as long as
I live; I will praise my
God while. I have my be-
ing. And so shall my
words please him : my joy
shall be in the Lord. As
for sinners, they shall be
consumed out of the earth,
and the ungodly shall
come to an end. Praise
thou the Lord, O my soul.
Praise the Lord.


the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now, and
ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.


G.

O great and most high God, who alone
hast immortality, and dwellest in light
unapproachable ; who hast made all cre-
ation in wisdom ; who hast divided the
light from the darkness, and hast ap-
pointed the sun to rule the day, the moon
and stars also to rule the night; who
hast vouchsafed unto us sinners at this
present hour also to come before thy
presence with confession, and to offer
unto thee our evening sacrifice of praise :
Do thou thyself, who lovest mankind,
direct our prayer as a censer before
thee, and accept it for a savour of sweet
incense ; and grant that we may pass
this present evening and the coming
night in peace. Endue us with the ar-
mour of light. Deliver us from the terror
of the night, and from everything that
walketh in darkness ; and grant that the
sleep, which thou hast appointed for the
repose of our weakness, may be free from
every imagination of the Devil. Yea, O
Master, Bestowerof all good things, may
we, being moved to compunction upon
our beds, call to remembrance thy holy
Name in the night season : that, enlight-
ened by meditation on thy statutes, we
may rise up in joyfulness of soul to glo-
rify thy goodness, offering up prayers
and supplications unto thy tender love
for our own sins and for those of all thy

people: whom do thou visit in mercy, through the intercessions of

the holy Birth-giver of God.

For thou art a gracious God, and lovest mankind, and unto thee

do we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy

Spirit, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.


GREAT VESPERS 5

Then the Priest (or the Deacon, if there be one) shall come out through the North
Door, and taking his stand in the usual place, shall recite

The Great Litany ( Velikaya Ekttniyd).

In peace let us pray to the Lord.

Choir. Lord, have mercy.

For the peace that is from above, and for the salvation of our
souls : I£

For the peace of the whole world ; for the welfare of God's holy
Churches, and for the union of them all : IJs

For this holy Temple, and for those who with faith, devoutness,
and in the fear of God have entered therein : Ifc

For our Holy Synod (or Patriarch) ; for our Bishop (or Archbishop,
or Metropolitan), N. ; for the honourable Presbytery, the Diaconate
in Christ ; for all the clergy and the laity : I£

Here follow petitions for the Ruler of the Land and for all the Authorities
(Emperor, or King, and Reigning House, or President, according to the
elements and nationalities of which the Parish is constituted).

That he will aid them and subdue under their feet every foe and
adversary: Ifc

For this city, for this holy Temple, and for every city and land,
and for those who with faith dwell therein : I£

For healthful seasons ; for abundance of the fruits of the earth,
and for peaceful times : I£

For those who travel by sea or by land ; for the sick and the suf-
fering ; for those who are in captivity, and for their salvation : Ifc

That he will deliver us from all tribulation, wrath, peril and
necessity : IJs

Succour us, save us, have mercy upon us, and keep us, O God, by
thy grace : I&

Calling to remembrance our most holy, undefiled, most blessed and
glorious Lady, the Birth-giver of God and ever-virgin Mary, with all the
Saints, let us commend ourselves, and each other, and all our life unto
Christ our God.

Choir. To thee, O Lord.

Exclamation.


$


zr
ft

r 1

o


s

^


r 1

o


p
<
ft

3

ft


1


Priest. For unto thee are due all glory, honour and worship, to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and
unto ages of ages. (5)

Choir. Amen.

Then shall be said or sung several verses from the First Selection of the Psalms
(Stikhosldvu Kafismi). (6)

Psalms i., ii.

Blessed is the man that hath not walked in the counsel of the un-
godly. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.


/


THE ALL-NIGHT VIGIL SERVICE


For the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous, and the way of the

ungodly shall perish. Alleluia. {Thrice.)

Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice unto him with reverence.

Alleluia. (Thrice.)

Blessed are all they that put their trust in him. Alleluia. ( Thrice.) (7)

Arise, O Lord : Save me, O my God. Alleluia. (Thrice.)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now,

and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.

Glory to thee, O Lord. (Thrice.)

Then the Deacon saith
The Little Litany (Mdlaya Ekikniyd).

Again, yet again, in peace let us pray to the Lord.

Choir. Lord, have mercy.

Succour us, save us, have mercy upon us, and keep us, O God, by thy
grace.

Choir. Lord, have mercy.

Calling to remembrance our most holy, undefiled, most blessed and
glorious Lady, the Birth-giver of God and ever-virgin Mary, with all
the Saints, let us commend ourselves, and each other, and all our life
unto Christ our God.

Choir. To thee, O Lord.

Exclamation.

Priest. For thine is the majesty, and thine are the kingdom and
the power and the glory, of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages.

Choir. Amen.

And here shall be sung immediately, Lord, I have cried unto thee, with its Verses
(Stihhl), as appointed. And in the mean time the Deacon cense th the Sanctu-
ary and all the Temple.


PSALMS CXLL, CXL1I., CXXX.,
CXVII.

Lord, I have cried unto thee,
hear me. Hear me, O Lord.
Lord, I have cried unto thee,
hear me: receive the voice of
my prayer when I call upon
thee. Hear me, O Lord. Let my
prayer be set forth in thy sight as
incense, and let the lifting up of
my hands be an evening sacrifice.

The Canticles (Stikhiry ; see Appen-
dix A) are then sung or read in
the proper Tone, as appointed, pre-
ceded ty Verses (Stikht).


The Priest prayeth, secretly.

In the evening, and in the
morning, and at noonday we
praise thee, we bless thee, we
give thanks unto thee, and we
pray unto thee, O Lord of all :
Direct thou our prayer before
thee as incense, and incline not
^mr hearts unto words or thoughts
T)f wickedness ; but deliver us
from all who seek after our souls.
For unto thee, Lord, O Lord,
lift we up our eyes, and in thee
have we trusted. Put us not to
shame, O our God.


&
S

3


GREAT VESPERS


&


{On the Lord's Day and the For unto thee are due all glory,
Great Feasts) : Bring my soul out honour and worship, to the Fa-
of prison, that I may give thanks ther, and to the Son, and to the
unto thy Name. Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and

unto ages of ages. Amen.

The righteous await me, until thou shalt requite me.

{On Feast Days) : Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord :
O Lord, hear my voice,

O let thine ears consider well the voice of my complaint.

{On Ordinary Days): If thou, Lord, wilt be extreme to mark what is
done amiss, O Lord, who may abide it.

Fof thy Name's sake I have patiently waited for thee, O Lord ; my
soul hath waited patiently for thy word ; my soul hath trusted in the
Lord.

{Or) : My soul fleeth unto the Lord before the morning watch, I say,
before the morning watch.

For with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous re-
demption. And he shall redeem Israel from all his sins.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now, and
ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.


Then shall be sung the Hymn to the Birth-giver of God (Dogmdtik) (8) in
the proper Tone*


Tone I * (Example.)

Let us sing the praises of Mary, Vir-
gin, Door of heaven, Glory of all the
world, sprung forth from man, who also
bare the Lord ; the Song of the Bodi-
less Powers, and the Enriching of the
faithful. For she revealed herself as
Heaven and the Temple of the Godhead.
She destroyed the bulwarks of enmity,
and ushered in peace, and threw open
the kingdom. Wherefore, in that we
possess this confirmation of our faith
we have a defender, even the Lord who
was born of her. Be bold, therefore, be
bold, ye people of God, for he, the All-
Powerful, will vanquish your foes.


While the Dogmdtik is Being sung,
the Holy Door is opened, and
the Priest and Deacon pass
before the High Place, through
the Left Door, and stand before
the Holy Door. (9)

Then the Deacon, having censed
the Holy Pictures (ikoni), shall
say in a low voice to the
Priest:

Bless, Master, the Holy En-
trance.

And the Priest, blessing with the
sign of the cross, shall say :

Blessed is the Entrance of
thy Holy Ones, now, and ever,
and unto ages of ages.

Deacon. Amen.


And when the Dogmdtik is finished the Deacon shall lift up the censer, as he
s/andeth in the middle of the Holy Door, and shall say aloud;

Wisdom, O believers !

* For the Dogmitiki, see Appendix A.


8 THE ALL-NIGHT VIGIL SERVICE

Then shall be sung the Hymn (Tropdr) composed by Sophronius, Patriarch of
Jerusalem.

O gladsome radiance of the holy glory of the Father immortal, hea-
venly, holy, blessed, Jesus Christ ! In that we now are come unto the
setting of the sun, and behold the light of even, we hymn thee, Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, God. For meet is it that at all times thou
shouldest be magnified by voices propitious, O Son of God, who be-
stowest life. For which cause all the world doth glorify thee.

The Priest and the Deacon enter the Sanctuary and go to the High Place.

Deacon. Let us attend. Wisdom !
Priest. Peace be unto all.
Reader. And to thy spirit.

Deacon. Wisdom ! Let us attend. — The Gradual {Prokinten) of the
, . . Tone. (10)

On Sunday Evenings Tone VIII. :

Behold now, praise the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord.
Verse (Stikh) : Ye that stand in the temple of the Lord, even in the
courts of the house of our God.

On Monday Evening, Tone IV. :

When I call upon the Lord, he will hear me.

Verse : Hear me when I call, O God of my righteousness.

On Tuesday Evenings Tone I. :

Thy mercy, O Lord, shall follow me all the days of my life.
Verse: The Lord is my shepherd, therefore can I lack nothing: he
hath led me in a green pasture.

On Wednesday Evening, Tone V. :

Save me, O God, for thy Name's sake, and judge me in thy strength.
Verse : Hear my prayer, O God, and hearken unto the words of my
mouth.

On Thursday Evenings Tone VI. :

My help cometh even from the Lord, who hath made heaven and
earth.

Verse : I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence cometh
my help.

On Friday Evening, Tone VII. :

Thou art my defence, O God, and thy goodness preventeth me.
Verse: Deliver me from mine enemies, O God, and save me from
them that rise up against me.

On Saturday Evening (the Lord's Day) :

The Lord is King, and hath put on glorious apparel.
Verse: The Lord hath put on his apparel, and hath girded himself
with strength.


GREAT VESPERS 9

Verse : For he hath made the round world so sure that it shall not
be moved.

Verse: Holiness becometh thy house, O Lord, forever.

Here, on certain Feasts and appointed days only, are read the Parables (ii)
(Paremii), the Deacon having said before each Parable : Wisdom ! Let us
attend !

The Gradual being finished, the Deacon shutteth the Holy Door t and goeth out
, through the North Door, and saith

The Augmented Litany (JSugtbaya Ektkniyd).

Let us say, with all our soul and with all our mind let us say,

Choir. Lord, have mercy.

O Lord Almighty, the God of our fathers, we beseech thee,
hearken and have mercy.

Choir. Lord, have mercy.

Have mercy upon us, O God, according to thy great mercy, we
beseech thee : hearken, and have mercy. ft

Here follow petitions for the Ruler of the Land and for all the Authorities
(Emperor, or King, and Reigning House, or President, according to the
elements and nationalities of which the Parish is constituted)..

Furthermore we pray for our Holy Synod (or Patriarch) ; for
our Bishop (or Archbishop, or Metropolitan), N. ; and for all our
brethren in Christ.

Furthermore we pray for all their Christ-loving Army and Navy, ft

Furthermore we pray for the blessed and ever-memorable founders
of this holy Temple; and for all our devout fathers and brethren,
Orthodox believers, departed this life before us, who here and in
all the world lie asleep in the Lord, ft

Furthermore we pray for mercy, life, peace, health, salvation, for-
giveness and remission of sins for the servants of God, our brethren
of this holy Temple, ft

Furthermore we pray for those who bear fruit and do good works
in this holy and all-honourable Temple ; for those who labour in its
service ; for the singers; and for the people here present, who await
in firm hope thy great and rich mercies, ft

Exclamation.

Priest. For thou art a merciful God, who lovest mankind, and unto
thee we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
Spirit, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages.

Choir. Amen.

Reader. Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this night without sin.
Blessed art thou, O Lord, the God of our fathers, and praised and glori-
fied is thy name forever.. Amen.

Let thy mercy be upon us, O Lord, even as we have set our hope
on thee. Blessed art thou, O Lord ; teach me thy statutes. Blessed


<

3

3


a


r\<»

^ c

«*. CO

Is-


io THE ALL-NIGHT VIGIL SERVICE

art thou, Master; make me to understand thy commandments.
Blessed art thou, Holy One ; enlighten me with thy precepts.

Thy mercy, O Lord, endureth forever : O despise not the works of
thy hands. To thee belongeth worship, to thee belongeth praise, to
thee belongeth glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
Spirit, now, and ever, unto ages of ages. Amen.

Deacon. Let us complete our evening prayer unto the Lord.

Choir. Lord, have mercy.

Succour us, save us, be merciful unto us, and keep us, O God, by thy
grace.

Choir. Lord, have mercy.

An evening all-perfect, holy, peaceful and sinless, let us be-
seech of the Lord : ft

An Angel of Peace, the faithful guide and guardian both of
our souls and bodies : ft

The pardon and remission of our sins and transgressions : ft

All things which are profitable to our souls and bodies, and
peace to the world : ft

That we may pass the residue of our life in peace arid peni-
tence: ft

A Christian ending to our life, painless, blameless, peaceful ; and
a good defence before the dread Judgment Seat of Christ : ft

Calling to remembrance our most holy, undefiled, most blessed and
glorious Lady, the Birth-giver of God and ever-virgin Mary, with all
the Saints, let us commend ourselves, and each other, and all our life
unto Christ our God.

Choir. To thee, O Lord.

Exclamation.

Priest. For thou art a gracious God, and lovest mankind, and unto
thee we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
Spirit, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages.

Choir. Amen.

Priest Peace be with you all. The Priest, secretly.

O Lord our God, who didst
bow the heavens and come down
for the salvation of mankind:
Look upon thy servants and thine
inheritance ; for unto thee, the
awful Judge, who yet lovest man-
kind, have thy servants bowed their heads, and submissively inclined
their necks, awaiting not succour from men, but expecting thy
mercy and looking confidently for thy salvation. Guard them at all
times, both during this present evening and. in the approaching
night, from every foe, from all adverse powers of the Devil, and
from vain thoughts and from evil imaginations.


Choir. And with thy spirit.
Deacon. Let us bow our heads
unto the Lord.

Choir. To thee, O Lord.


r


GREAT VESPERS II

Aloud. Blessed and glorified be the majesty of thy kingdom, of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and unto
ages of ages.

Choir. Amen.

Then the Stikhiry na Stikhdvne {Selected Verses) shall be sung 9 and the Song of
St, Simeon followeth ; Lord, now lettest: (Seepage 13.)


THE LITIYA. (12)

But sometimes (especially on the Eve of a Great Feast) there followeth the Litiyd,
that is % the Petitions of Fervent Devotion.

When there is a Litiyd, the Priest and Deacon, preceded by taper bearers^ come
together to the end of the Temple opposite the Sanctuary ', while the Choir is\
singing the Canticles (Stikhiry Litiyiny) of the Temple or of the Feast.

Then the Deacon saith, aloud, the following Prayer:

O God, save thy people, and bless thine heritage. Visit thy
world with mercy and bounties ; exalt the horn of Orthodox
Christians, and send down upon us thy rich mercies. Through
the prayers of our all-undefiled Lady, the Birth-giver of God and
ever-virgin Mary : through the might of the precious and life-
giving Cross : through the protection of the honourable Bodiless
Powers of heaven ; of the honourable, glorious Prophet, Fore-
runner and Baptist, John ; of the holy, glorious and all-laudable
Apostles ; of our Holy Fathers, great Hierarchs and (Ecumenical
Teachers, Basil the Great, Gregory the Divine and John Chry-
sostom ; of our Holy Father Nicholas, Archbishop of Myra in
Lycia, the Wonderworker; of our Holy Fathers of All-Russia,
Wonderworkers, Peter, Alexis, Jonah and Philip; of the holy,
glorious, right-victorious Martyrs; of our reverend and God-
bearing Fathers, the holy and righteous ancestors of God,
Joachim and Anna ; of Saint N. {the Patron Saint of the Temple) ;
and of all thy Saints : We beseech thee, O all-merciful Lord, give
ear unto us sinners, who make our supplications unto thee, and
have mercy upon us. IJs

Here follow petitions for the Ruler of the Land and for all the Authori- f»
ties (Emperor, or King, and Reigning House, or President, according Jj

wic "* "


I

13


5*
a.


P


to the elements and nationalities of which the Parish is constituted). 3

Furthermore we pray for our Holy Synod (or Patriarch) ; for ^ "
our Bishop (or Archbishop, or Metropolitan), N. ; for the honour-
able Presbytery, the Diaconate in Christ ; and for all our brethren
in Christ ; and for every Christian soul that is afflicted and weary,
in need of God's mercies and succour ; for the protection of this
holy Temple, and for those who dwell therein ; for the peace and
quietness of the whole world ; for the welfare of God's holy
Churches ; for the salvation and assistance of our fathers and
brethren who, with diligence and in the fear of God, do labour


12 THE ALL-NIGHT VIGIL SERVICE


I?

a.?'
IS.


and serve ; for those who are absent and abroad ; for the heal-
ing of those who lie in sickness; for the repose, refreshment,
blessed memory and remission of sins of all our devout fathers
and brethren, Orthodox believers, departed this life before us,
who here, and in all the world, lie asleep in the Lord ; for the
deliverance of captives ; and for our brethren who are taking part
in these ministrations ; and for all who minister and have minis-
tered in this holy Temple, let us say : 1J>

Furthermore we pray that he will preserve this city and this
holy Temple, and every city and land from pestilence, famine,
earthquake, flood, fire, the sword, the invasion of enemies, and
from civil war ; and that our good God, who loveth mankind, will
be graciously favourable and easy to be entreated, and will turn
away from us all the wrath stirred up against us, and deliver us
from all his righteous chastisement which impendeth against us,
and have mercy upon us. I£

Furthermore we pray that the Lord God will hearken unto the voice
of petition of us sinners, and show mercy upon us.

Choir. Lord, have mercy. {Thrice.)

Then the Priest maketh mention, secretly, of whomsoever he will, doth of the
living and of the dead.

Priest, aloud. Hear us, O God our Saviour, the hope of all the ends
of the earth, and of those who are far off upon the sea ; and show mercy,
show mercy, O Master, upon us sinners, and be merciful unto us.

For thou art a merciful God and lovest mankind, and unto thee we
ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now, and ever, and unto ages of ages.

Choir. Amen.

Priest. Peace be with you all.

Choir. And with thy spirit.

Deacon. Let us bow our heads unto the Lord.

Then, as all bow their heads, the Priest reciteth the following Prayer, so that all
may hear :

O most merciful Master, Lord Jesus Christ our God, through the
prayers of our all-undefiled Lady, the Birth-giver of God and ever-virgin
Mary {and thence as in the preceding prayer, page 1 1, ending with) : and
of all thy Saints : Make our prayer acceptable ; grant us remission of
our transgressions ; hide us under the shadow of thy wings ; drive far
from us every foe and adversary; make our life peaceful, O Lord.
Have mercy upon us and upon thy world ; and save our souls : for thou
art gracious and lovest mankind.

Here are sung the appointed Canticles (Stikhiry) in the proper Tone, or
Bmdot of the Feast ; ana so singing we return to the centre of the Temple,

Lltty*. where in special vessels the bread, wine, oil and wheat are already

prepared.


GREAT VESPERS '13

Choir. Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace,
according to thy word. For mine eyes have seen thy salva- T *
tion, which thou hast prepared before the face of all people. To be a
light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of thy people Israel.

Reader. O Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Immortal One, have mercy
upon us. (Thrice?)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now,
and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

O all-holy Trinity, have mercy upon us. O Lord, wash away our sins.
O Master,, pardon our transgressions. O Holy One, visit and heal our
infirmities, for thy Name's sake.

Lord, have mercy. (Thrice.}

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now,
and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Our Father, who art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy king-
dom come. Thy will be done on earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this
day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive those
who trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation ; But deliver
us from the Evil One:

Priest. For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and
unto ages of ages.

Choir. Amen.

Then shall be sung ike Hymn (Tropdr) of the Feast*

Hail, O Virgin Birth-giver of the Lord ! Mary full of grace, the
Lord is with thee. Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the
fruit of thy womb. For thou hast borne the Saviour of our souls.

After the Deacon hath censed about the table whereon stand the bread,

wheat ', wine and oil, (12) the Priest, taking one of the loaves, shall «<_-

make therewith the sign of the cross over the other loaves, and shall JSJ^J

say aloud the following Prayer, pointing with his right hand to the Onat

loaves, wheat, wine, and oil, as he uttereth the words, Do thou, the "■■■*•
same Lord, bless :

O Lord Jesus Christ our God, who didst bless the five loaves and
didst therewith feed the five thousand : Do thou, the same Lord, bless
these loaves, wheat, wine and oil ; and multiply them in this holy
habitation, and in all thy world ; and sanctify all the faithful who
shall partake of them. For it is thou, O Christ our God, who dost
bless and sanctify and nourish all things ; and unto thee we ascribe
glory, with thy Father which hath no beginning, and thine all-holy,
good, and life-creating Spirit, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages.

Choir. Amen.

* For Hymns of the Twelve Great Feasts, see the Special Services.


14 THE ALUNIGHT VIGIL SERVICE

And immediately after the Amen :

arwt Choir. Blessed be the Name of the Lord, henceforth and for-

**■»■■■ ever. {Thrice.)

Psalm xxxiv.
Reader. I will alway give thanks unto the Lord ; his praise shall ever
be in my mouth. My soul shall make her boast in the Lord ; the humble
shall hear thereof, and be glad. O praise the Lord with me, and let us
magnify his Name together. I sought the Lord, and he heard me ;
yea, he delivered me out of all my fear. They had an eye unto him,
and were lightened, and their faces were not ashamed. Lo, the poor
crieth, and the Lord heareth him ; yea, and saveth him out of all his
troubles. The angel of the Lord tarrieth round about them that fear
him, and delivereth them. O taste, and see, how gracious the Lord is :
blessed is the man that trusteth in him. O fear the Lord, ye that are
his saints ; for they that fear him lack nothing. The lions do lack,
and suffer hunger ; but they who seek the Lord shall want no manner
of thing that is good.

And the Priest cometh forth, and standeth before the Holy Door. And when the
Psalm is finished, he turneth and saith to the People :

The blessing of the Lord, through his grace and loving-kindness, be
upon you always, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages.
Choir. Amen.

And at Eastertide /

Butir- Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down Death by death,
***•* and upon those in the tomb bestowing life.

And if it be the Vigil Office, and not Vespers only, the Reader immediately
beginneth the Six Psalms of the Matins office. {Seepage 18.)

But if it be Great Vespers alone:

Deacon. Wisdom.

Choir. Bless, Master.

Priest. The Existing is blessed, even Christ our God, always, now,
and ever, and unto ages of ages.

Choir. Amen. Establish, O Lord, the Holy Orthodox Faith, and
Orthodox Christians, unto ages of ages.

Priest. Save us, O most pure Birth-giver of God.

Choir. More honourable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the Seraphim, thou who without defilement barest
God the Word, true Birth-giver of God, we magnify thee.

Priest Glory to thee, O Christ our God, our sure hope ; glory to thee.

Choir. Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now, and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen. Lord, have mercy. Bless,
Master.


MATINS IS

And the Priest, turning from the Holy Door towards the people, pronounceth
the Benediction :

May Christ, our true God, through the prayers of his most-holy
Mother ; of Saint N. {the saint of the day) ; and of all the Saints, have
mercy upon us and save us, in that he is gracious and loveth man-
kind.
