THE ORDER FOR MATINS*

When the All-Night Vigil is celebrated consecutively, as is the general custom ,
on the Eve of the Lord's Day or of a Feast, all that here followeth, down to
Glory to God in the highest {see page 18), shall be omitted. When, however,
from necessity or for convenience. Matins are celebrated separately, the Priest
shall begin {the Holy Door is being closed)'*

Blessed is our God always, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages.

Reader. Amen.

O Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Immortal One, have mercy upon us.
( Thrice. )

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now, and
ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

O all-holy Trinity, have mercy upon us. O Lord, wash away our sins.
O Master, pardon our transgressions. O Holy One, visit and heal our
infirmities, for thy Name's sake.

Lord, have mercy. {Thrice.)

Our Father, who art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy king-
dom come. Thy will be done on earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this
day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive those
who trespass against us, And lead us not into temptation ; But deliver
us from the Evil One :

Priest For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and
unto ages of ages. Amen.

Reader. Lord, have mercy. {Twelve times.)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now,
and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

O come, let us worship God our King. O come let, us worship
and fall down before Christ, our King and our God. O come,
let us worship and fall down before the Very Christ, our King and
our God. O come, let us worship and fall down before him.


While the following Psalms are being read, the Priest censeth the Holy
Altar, (1) and coming forth through the North Door y he censeth the Holy
Images and the People.

Psalm xx.

The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble ; the Name of the God
of Jacob defend thee: send thee help from the sanctuary, and
* For an explanation of the Symbolism, see Appendix B, IL


i6


THE ALL-NIGHT VIGIL SERVICE


strengthen thee out of Sion : remember all thy offerings, and ac-
cept thy burnt-sacrifice : grant thee thy heart's desire, and fulfil
all thy mind. We will rejoice in thy salvation, and triumph in the
Name of the Lord our God : the Lord perform all thy petitions.
Now know I that the Lord helpeth his Anointed, and will hear him
from his holy heaven, even with the wholesome strength of his
right hand. Some put their trust in chariots, and some in horses ;
but we will remember the Name of the Lord our God. They are
brought down and fallen ; but we are risen and stand upright. Save,
Lord ; and hear us, O King of heaven, when we call upon thee.

Psalm xxi.

The King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord ; exceeding
glad shall he be of thy salvation. Thou hast given him his heart's
desire, and hast not denied him the request of his lips. For thou
shalt prevent him with the blessings of goodness, and shalt set a
crown of pure gold upon his head. He asked life of thee ; and thou
gavest him a long life, even for ever and ever. His honour is great
in thy salvation ; glory and great worship shalt thou lay upon him.
For thou shalt give him everlasting felicity, and make him glad
with the joy of thy countenance. And why? because the King
putteth his trust in the Lord ; and in the mercy of the Most High-
est he shall not miscarry. All thine enemies shall feel thy hand ;
thy right hand shall find out them that hate thee. Thou shalt make
them like a fiery oven in time of thy wrath : the Lord shall de-
stroy them in his displeasure, and the fire shall consume them.
Their fruit shalt thou root out of the earth, and their seed from
among the children of men. For they intended mischief against
thee, and imagined such a device as they are not able to perform.
Therefore shalt thou put them to flight, and the strings of thy
bow shalt thou make ready against the face of them. Be thou
exalted, Lord, in thine own strength ; so will we sing, and praise
thy power.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now,
and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

O Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Immortal One, have mercy
upon us. {Thrice.)

O all-holy Trinity, have mercy upon us. O Lord, wash away our
sins. O Master, pardon our transgressions. O Holy One, visit and
heal our infirmities, for thy Name's sake.

Lord, have mercy. {Thrice!)

Our Father, who art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy
kingdom come. Thy will be done on earth, As it is in heaven. Give
us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, As we
forgive those who trespass against us. And lead us not into temp-
tation : But deliver us from the Evil One :


MATINS

Priest For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory,
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now, and
ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

And the following Hymns ( Tropari) :

O Lord, save thy people, and bless thine inheritance, granting
to the most God-fearing (Emperor, King, or President), N M victory
over all adversaries, and by thy Cross preserving 'thine Estate.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit

Do thou who, of thine own good will, upon the Cross wast lifted
up, bestow thy bounties upon the new State which is called by thy
Name, O Christ, our God ; make glad with thy might our most God-
fearing (Emperor, King, or President), N., granting victory over
his adversaries unto him who hath thine aid, which is a panoply of
peace, a trophy invincible.

Now, and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Hymn to the Birth-giver of God {Bogorbditchen).
O Champion dread, who cannot be put to confusion, despise not
our petitions. O Good One, all-lauded Birth-giver of our God, stab-
lish thou the State of those who hold the Orthodox faith: save
the (Emperor), N., whom thou hast called to rule over us ; bestow
upon him victory from heaven : for thou didst give birth unto God,
O only-blessed One.

Then shall the Priest say :

Have mercy upon us, O God, according to thy great mercy, we
beseech thee : hearken, and have mercy.
Choir. Lord, have mercy.

Here follow petitions for the Ruler of the Land and for all the Authori-
ties (Emperor, or King, and Reigning House, or President, according to the
elements and nationalities of which the Parish is constituted).

Choir. Lord, have mercy. {Thrice.)

Furthermore we pray for our Holy Synod {or Patriarch) ; and for
our Bishop {or Archbishop, or Metropolitan), N.
Choir. Lord, have mercy. ( Thrice.)

Furthermore we pray for all our brethren, and for all Christians.
Choir. Lord, have mercy. {Thrice.)

Exclamation.

Priest. For thou art a merciful God, who lovest mankind, and
unto thee we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages.

Choir. Amen. Bless, Father, in the name of the Lord.

Priest Glory to the Holy, Consubstantial, Life-giving and Un-
divided Trinity, always, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages.

Choir. Amen.


17


*


18 THE ALL-NIGHT VIGIL SERVICE

VIGIL.

When the All-Night Vigil is celebrated in its usual form, all the ^
shall be omitted; and after the Blessing {see page 14) the Holy Doors shall Fe
closed, and the Reader shall immediately say :

Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward
men. {Thrice.)

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy
praise. (Twice.)

Bjjtar- Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down Death by death,
and upon those in the tomb bestowing life. (Thrice)

The Reader then readeth the Six Psalms.

Psalm hi.

Lord, how are they increased that trouble me ! many are they that
rise against me. Many one there be that say of my soul, There is no
help for him in his God. But thou, O Lord, art my defender; thou
art my worship, and the lifter up of my head. I did call upon the Lord
with my voice, and he heard me out of his holy hill. I laid me down
and slept, and rose up again ; for the Lord sustained me. I will not be
afraid for ten thousands of the people, that have set themselves against
me round about. Up, Lord, and help me, O my God ! For thou smitest
all mine enemies upon the cheek-bone ; thou hast broken the teeth of
the ungodly. Salvation belongeth unto the Lord ; and thy blessing is
upon thy people. I will lay me down in peace and take my rest : for
it is thou, Lord, only that maketh me dwell in safety.

Psalm xxxviii.

Put me not to rebuke, O Lord, in thine anger ; neither chasten me
in thy heavy displeasure. For thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy
hand presseth me sore. There is no health in my flesh, because of thy
displeasure ; neither is there any rest in my bones, by reason of my sin.
For my wickednesses are gone over my head, and are like a sore bur-
den, too heavy for me to bear. My wounds stink, and are corrupt,
through my foolishness. I am brought into so great trouble and misery,
that I go mourning all the day long. For my loins are filled with a
sore disease, and there is no whole part in my body. I am feeble and
sore smitten ; I have roared for the very disquietness of my heart.
Lord, thou knowest all my desire ; and my groaning is not hid from thee.
My heart panteth, my strength hath failed me, and the sight of mine
eyes is gone from me. My lovers and my neighbours did stand looking
upon my trouble, and my kinsmen stood afar off. They also that sought
after my life laid snares for me ; and they that went about to do me evil
talked of wickedness, and imagined deceit all the day long. As for me,
I was like a deaf man, and heard not ; and as one that is dumb, who


MATINS 19

doth not open his mouth. I became even as a man that heareth not,
and in whose mouth are no reproofs. For in thee, O Lord, have I put
my trust ; thou shalt answer for me, O Lord my God. I have required
that they, even mine enemies, should not triumph over me ; for when
my foot slipt, they rejoiced greatly against me. And I truly am set in
the plague, and my heaviness is ever in my sight. For I will confess
my wickedness, and be sorry for my sin. But mine enemies live, and
are mighty ; and they that hate me wrongfully are many in number.
They also that reward evil for good are against me ; because I follow
the thing that good is. Forsake me not, O Lord my God ; be not thou
far from me. Haste thee to help me, O Lord God of my salvation.

Psalm lxiii.

O God, thou art my God ; early will I seek thee. My soul thirsteth
for thee ; my flesh also longeth after thee, in a barren and dry land
where no water is. Thus have I looked for thee in holiness, that I
might behold thy power and glory. For thy loving-kindness is better
than the life itself : my lips shall praise thee. As long as I live will I
magnify thee in this manner, and lift up my hands in thy Name. My
soul shall be satisfied, even as it were with marrow and fatness, when
my mouth praiseth thee with joyful lips. Have I not remembered
thee in my bed, and thought upon thee when I was waking? Because
thou hast been my helper ; therefore under the shadow of thy wings
will I rejoice. My soul hangeth upon thee ; thy right hand hath up-
holden me. These also that seek the hurt of my soul, they shall go
under the earth. Let them fall upon the edge of the sword, that they
maybe a portion for foxes. But the King shall rejoice in God ; all they
also that swear by him shall be commended ; for the mouth of them
that speak lies shall be stopped. In the night watches have I trusted
in thee: For thou hast been my helper, and under the shadow of
thy wings will I rejoice. My soul cleaveth unto thee : and thy right
hand shall uphold me.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now,
and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to thee, O God. {Thrice, without
reverences.}

Lord, have mercy. {Thrice.}

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now,
and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.


20


THE ALL-NIGHT VIGIL SERVICE


Psalm lxxxvih.

Lord God of my
salvation, I have cried
day and night before
thee : O let my prayer
enter into thy pre-
sence, incline thine
ear unto my calling ;
for my soul is full of
trouble, and my life
draweth nigh unto
hell. I am counted as
one of them that go
down into the pit,
and I have been even
as a man that hath
no strength. Free
among the dead, like
unto them that are
wounded, and lie in
the grave, who are
out of remembrance,
and are cut away
from thy hand Thou
hast laid me in the
lowest pit, in a place
of darkness, and in the
deep. Thine indigna-
tion lieth hard upon
me, and thou hast
vexed me with all thy
storms. Thou hast put
away mine acquaint-
ance far from me, and
made me to be ab-
horred of them. I am
so fast in prison that 1
cannot get forth. My
sight faileth for very
trouble; Lord, I have
called dailyupon thee,
I have stretch edforth
my hands unto thee.
Dost thou show won-
ders among the dead ?
or shall the dead rise


The Priest now saith, secretly, the Morning
Prayers ; the first three in the Sanctuary.


We give thanks unto thee, O Lord our
God, who hast raised us up from our beds,
and hast put into our mouths the word of
praise, that we may adore and call upon thy
holy Name. And we entreat thee, by thy mer-
cies which thou hast exercised always in our
life, send down now also thine aid upon
those who stand before the presence of thy
holy glory, and await the rich mercy which
is from thee. And grant that they may always
with fear and love worship thee, praise thee,
hymn thee, and adore thine inexpressible
goodness.

For unto thee is due all honour, glory and
worship, to the Father, and to the Son, and
to the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and unto
ages of ages. Amen.

li.

From the night season our soul awaketh
early unto thee, O our God ; for thy precepts
are a light upon the earth. Teach us to per-
fect righteousness and holiness in thy fear ;
for we glorify thee, our God, who existest in
verity. Incline thine ear and hear us; and
call to remembrance by their names all those
who are with us and pray with us ; and save
them by thy might. Bless thy people and
sanctify thine inheritance. Grant peace to
thy world, to thy Churches, to the priests, to
the Authorities, and to all thy people.

For blessed and glorified is thine all-hon-
ourable and majestic Name, of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now,
and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amea

in.
In the night season our soul awaketh early
unto thee, O God, for thy precepts are light.
Teach us thy righteousness, thy command-
ments and thy statutes, O God. Enlighten
the eyes of our understanding, lest at any
time we sleep unto death in sins. Dispel all


MATINS


21


up again, and praise
thee? Shall thy loving-
kindness be showed
in the grave ? or thy
faithfulness in de-
struction ? Shall thy
wondrous works be
known in the dark?
and thyrighteousness
in the land where all
things are forgotten ?
Unto thee have I
cried, O Lord ; and
early shall my prayer
come before thee.
Lord, why abhorrest
thou my soul, and
hidest thou thy face
from me? I am in
misery, and like unto
him that is at the
point to die ; even
from my youth up thy
terrors have I suf-
fered with a troubled
mind. Thy wrathful
displeasure goeth
over me, and the fear
of thee hath undone
me. They came round
about me daily like
water, and compassed
me together on every
side. My lovers and
friends hast thou put
away from me, and
hid mine acquaint-
ance out of my sight.
O Lord God of my
salvation I have cried
day and night be-
fore thee : O let my
prayer enter into
thy presence, incline
thine ear unto my
calling.


darkness from our hearts. Graciously give
unto us the Sun of Righteousness, and pre-
serve our life unassailed, by the seal of thy
Holy Spirit. Guide our steps into the way
of peace. Grant us to behold the dawn and
the day with joy, that we may raise our
morning prayers unto thee.

For thine is the dominion, and thine are
the majesty and the power and the glory, of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Spirit, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages.
Amen.

The Priest now Cometh forth, and standing with
uncovered head before the Holy Door, he saith
the remaining Prayers.

IV.

O Lord God, holy and unsearchable, who
didst command the light to shine forth from
the darkness ; who hast refreshed us by the
slumber of the night, and hast raised us up
to glorify and supplicate thy goodness, being
implored of thine own tender loving-kindness :
Accept us also now who bow down in adora-
tion before thee, and render thanks unto thee
according to the measure of our strength ; and
grant us all our petitions which are unto sal-
vation. Make us children of the light, and of
the day, and heirs of thine everlasting good
things. Call to remembrance, O Lord, in the
multitude of thy bounties, all thy people here
present with us who make their supplications
unto thee, and all our brethren on land, on
the sea, and in every place of thy dominion,
who are in need of thy loving-kindness and
of thy succour, and vouchsafe unto them
all thy great mercy, that being always pre-
served in safety of soul and body, we may
with boldness magnify thy wondrous and
blessed Name, of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and
unto ages of ages. Amen.

For thou art the God of bounties and of lov-
ing-kindness, and unto thee we ascribe glory,
to the Father, and to the Son, and to the


22


THE ALL-NIGHT VIGIL SERVICE


Psalm cm.
Praise the Lord,
O my soul; and all
that is within me,
praise his holy Name
Praise the Lord, O
my soul, and forget
not all his benefits :
who forgiveth all
thy sin, and healeth
all thine infirmities ;
who saveth thy life
from destruction, and
crowneth thee with
mercy and loving-
kindness ; who satis-
fieth thy mouth with
good things, making
thee young and lusty
as an eagle. The
Lord executeth right-
eousness and judg-
ment for all them that
are oppressed with
wrong. He showed
his ways unto Moses,
his works unto the
children of Israel. The
Lord is full of com-
passion and mercy,
long-suffering, and of
great goodness. He
will not alway be
ch iding ; neitherkeep-
eth he his anger for-
ever. He hath not
dealt wfth us after our
sins ; nor rewarded
us according to our
wickednesses. For
look how high the
heaven is in compar-
ison of the earth; so
great is his mercy
also toward them that
fear him. Look how


Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and unto ages of
ages. Amen.

v.

O Treasury of good things, Fountain eter-
nal, O Father all-holy who workest wonders,
all-powerful and almighty: We all adore thee
and entreat thee, calling thy mercies and thy
compassion to the aid and defence of our
lowliness. Call to remembrance thy suppli-
ants, O Lord ; accept the morning prayers
of us all as incense before thee ; and let none
of us be found reprobate, but encompass us
with thy bounties. Call to remembrance, O
Lord, those who watch and sing praises to
thy glory, and to the glory of thine Only-be-
gotten Son who is our God, and of thy Holy
Spirit. Be thou their helper and their sup-
port. Receive thou their supplications upon
thy most heavenly and spiritually discerning
altar.

For thou art our God, and unto thee we
ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and
unto ages of ages. Amen.

VI.

We give thanks unto thee, O Lord God of
our salvation ; for thou doest all things which
are for the welfare of our life, that we may
ever look upward unto thee, our Saviour and
the Benefactor of our souls. For thou hast
refreshed us in that part of the night which
is past, and hast raised us up from our beds,
and hast led us to stand here in adoration
of thy precious Name. Wherefore we entreat
thee, O Lord, vouchsafe unto us grace and
power, that we may be enabled with under-
standing to sing praises unto thee, and to
pray without ceasing, in fear and trembling
working out our own salvation, through the
succour of thy Christ. Call to remembrance,
O Lord, those who cry aloud unto thee in
the night season ; hearken unto them and
have mercy, and crush under their feet in-
visible and warring enemies.

For thou art the King of Peace and the


K 1

3


MATINS


23


. wide also the east is
from the west : so far
hath he set our sins
from us. Yea, like as
a father pitieth his
own children ; even
so is the Lord mer-
ciful unto them that
fear him. For he
knoweth whereof we
are made; he remem-
bereth that we are
but dust. The days of
man are but as grass ;
for he flourisheth as
a flower of the field.
For as soon as the
wind goeth over it,
it is gone ; and the
place thereof shall
know it no more. But
the merciful goodness
of the Lord endureth
for ever and ever
upon them that fear
him ; and his right-
eousness upon chil-
dren's children; even
upon such as keep his
covenant, and think
upon his command-
ments to do them.
The Lord hath pre-
pared his seat in hea-
ven, and his kingdom
ruleth over all. O
praise the Lord, ye
angels of his, ye that
excel in strength ; ye
that fulfil his com-
mandment and heark-
en unto the voice of
his word, O praise
the Lord, all ye his
hosts ; ye servants of
his that do his plea-


Saviour of our souls, and unto thee we ascribe
glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and unto
ages of ages. Amen.

VII.

O God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who hast raised us up from our beds, and hast
gathered us together at this hour of prayer :
Grant us grace in the opening of our lips, and
accept our thanksgivings as we have power to
make them ; and instruct us in thy statutes.
For we know not how to pray as we ought
unless thou, O Lord, by thy Holy Spirit, dost
guide us*. Wherefore we beseech thee : Par-
don, remit, forgive whatsoever sins we may
have committed unto this present hour,
whether by word, or deed, or thought, whether
voluntarily or involuntarily ; for if thou wilt
be extreme to mark iniquity, O Lord, Lord,
who shall stand ? For with thee is redemp-
tion. For thou only art holy, a mighty helper
and the defender of our life ; and our song
shall be ever of thee.

Blessed and glorified be the might of thy
kingdom, of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and unto
ages of ages. Amen. 1

VIII.

O Lord our God, who hast banished from
us the sluggishness of sleep, and hast as-
sembled us together by a holy bidding, that
in the night-season also we may lift up our
hands, and make unto thee thankful acknow-
ledgment of thy righteous judgments: Accept
our prayers, petitions, confessions of thanks
and nocturnal worship ; and grant unto us,
O God, faith invincible,love unwavering, hope
unfeigned. Bless our goings out and our
comings in ; our deeds and works, and words
and thoughts. And grant that we may come
to the beginning of this day praising, singing
and blessing the goodness of thine ineffable
beneficence.

For blessed is thine all-holy Name, and all-


M


THE ALI^NIGHT VIGIL SERVICE


sure. O speak good
of the Lord, all ye
works of his, in all
places of his domin-
ion : praise thou the
Lord, O my souL In
all places of his do-
minion, praise thou
the Lord, O my soul.

Psalm cxliii.

Hear my prayer, O
Lord, and consider
my desire; hearken
unto me for thy truth
and righteousness*
sake. And enter not
into judgment with
thyservant ; for in thy
sight shall no man liv-
ing be justified. For
the enemy hath per-
secuted my soul ; he
hath smitten my life
down to the ground ;
he hath laid me in the
darkness, as the men
that have been long
dead. Therefore is my
spirit vexed within
me, and my heart
within me is desolate.
Yet do I remember
the time past : I muse
upon all thy works ;
yea, I exercise myself
in the works of thy
hands. I stretch forth
my hands unto thee ;
my soul gaspeth unto
thee as a thirsty land.
Hear me, O Lord.
and that soon ; for my
spirit waxeth faint :
hide not thyface from


magnified is the kingdom of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now, and
ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

IX.

Illumine our hearts, O Sovereign Master,
who lovest man, with the pure light of thy
wisdom, and open the eyes of our understand-
ing to the comprehension of the proclama-
tion of thy Gospel. Implant in us, also, the
fear of thy blessed commandments; that
trampling down all carnal appetites, we may
lead a godly life, both thinking and doing
always such things as are well pleasing in
thy sight.

For thou art the sanctification and the
illumination both of our souls and bodies, O
Christ our God, and unto thee we ascribe
glory, together with thy Father, who hath no
beginning, and thine all-holy and blessed and
life-giving Spirit, now, and ever, and unto ages
of ages. Amen.

x.

O Lord our God, who hast granted unto
men pardon through repentance, and hast
set us, as an example of the acknowledgment
of sin and of the confession which is unto
forgiveness, the repentance of the Prophet
David : Do thou, the same Lord, have mercy
upon us according to thy great mercy, not-
withstanding the manifold and great iniqui-
ties into which we have fallen ; and through
the multitude of thy bounties, blot out our
transgressions. For unto thee have we
sinned, O Lord, who knowest the secret and
hidden things of the heart of man, and who
alone hast power to remit sins ; and as thou
hast created a clean heart within us, and
established us with thy guiding Spirit, and
made known unto us the joy of salvation, cast
thou us not away from thy presence. But
inasmuch as thou art good and lovest man,
graciously vouchsafe unto us that even until
our uttermost breath, we may offer unto
thee the sacrifice of righteousness, and an
offering upon thy holy altars.


3


me, lest I be like unto
them that go down
into the pit. O let me
hear thy loving-kind-
ness betimes in the
morning ; for in thee
is my trust : show thou
me the way that I
should walk in ; for I
lift up my soul unto
thee. Deliver me, O
Lord, from mine ene-
mies ; for I flee unto
thee to hide me.
Teach me to do the
thing that pleaseth
thee ; for thou art my
God : let thy loving
Spirit lead me forth
into the land of right-
eousness. Quicken
me, O Lord, for thy
Name's sake : and for
thy righteousness'
sake bring my soul
out of trouble. And
of thy goodness slay
mine enemies, and de-
stroy all them that vex
my soul; for I am thy
servant.

Hearken unto me
in thy righteousness,
O Lord, and enter not
into judgment with
thy servant {twice).
Thy gracious spirit
shall direct my paths
upon earth.

Glory to the Father,
and to the Son, and
to the Holy Spirit,
now, and ever, and
unto ages of ages.
Amen.


MATINS

Through the mercies and bounties and
love toward mankind of thine Only-begotten
Son, with whom thou art blessed, together
with thine all-holy, and good, and life-giving
Spirit, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages.
Amen.

XI.

O God, our God, who hast brought into
subjection to thy will all the powers endowed
with speech and reason, we beseech thee and
supplicate thee: Accept our praises, which
together with all thy creatures we offer ac-
cording to our strength ; and reward us with
the rich gifts of thy goodness. For unto thee
every knee doth bow, whether in heaven or
on the earth, or in the regions under the
earth, and every breath and created being
doth sing thine ineffable glory. For thou
only art the true and most merciful God.

For all the powers of heaven maghify thee,
and unto thee we ascribe glory, to the Father,
and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now,
and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

XII.

We praise thee, we hymn thee, we bless
thee, we give thanks unto thee, O God of our
fathers, that thou hast brought us in safety
through the shades of night, and hast shown
unto us once again the light of day. And we
entreat of thy goodness : Be gracious unto
our sins, and accept our prayer in thy great
tenderness of heart For we flee unto thee,
the merciful and almighty God. Shine in our
hearts with the true Sun of thy Righteous-
ness; enlighten our mind and guard all our
senses ; that walking uprightly as in the day,
in the way of thy statutes, we may attain unto
life eternal (for with thee is the source of life) ;
and graciously be permitted to come unto
the fruition of the light unapproachable.

For thou art our God, and unto thee we
ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and
unto ages of ages. Amen.


25


5


26 THE ALL-NIGHT VIGIL SERVICE

Then the Deacon, or if there be none, the Priest, standing in the customary
place, in front of the Holy Door, shall recite

The Great Litany {Velikaya Ektbtiya).

In peace let us pray to the Lord.

Choir, Lord, have mercy.

For the peace that is from above, and for the salvation of our
souls : Ifc

For the peace of the whole world ; for the welfare of God's holy
churches, and for the union of them all : $

For this holy Temple, and for those who with faith, devoutness,
and in the fear of God have entered therein : Ifc

For our Holy Synod {or Patriarch) ; for our Bishop {or Arch-
bishop, or Metropolitan), N. ; for the honourable Presbytery, the
Diaconate in Christ ; for all the clergy and the laity : Ifc

Here follow petitions for the Ruler of the Land and for all the Authorities
(Emperor, or King, and Reigning House, or President, according to the
elements and nationalities of which the Parish is constituted).

That he will aid them and subdue under their feet every foe
and adversary : I£

For this city, for this holy Temple, and for every city and land,
and for those who with faith dwell therein : Ifc

For healthful seasons ; for abundance of the fruits of the earth,
and for peaceful times : ft

For those who travel by sea or by land ; for the sick and the suf-
fering ; for those who are in captivity, and for their salvation : Ifc

That he will deliver us from all tribulation, wrath, peril and
necessity: I£

Succour us, save us, have mercy upon us, and keep us, O God, by
thy grace : #

Calling to remembrance our most holy, undefiled, most blessed and
glorious Lady, the Birth-giver of God and ever-virgin Mary, with all
the Saints, let us commend ourselves, and each other, and all our life
unto Christ our God.

Choir. To thee, O Lord.

Exclamation.

Priest For unto thee are due all glory, honour and worship, to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and unto
ages of ages.

Choir. Amen.

Then immediately the Deacon exclaimeth, and the Choir singeth ; (3)

God is the Lord, and hath revealed himself unto us. Blessed is he
that cometh in the Name of the Lord. {Four times.)


3


zr

r

o


r

o


3

O


MATINS


27


And the Deacon, meanwhile, interposeth the following Verses (Stikhi) : (4)

Verse 1 : O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious ; because
his mercy endureth forever.

Verse 2 : All the nations compassed me about, but in the Name of
the Lord have I driven them back.

Verse 3 : I shall not die but live, and declare the works of the Lord.

Verse 4 : The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become
the head of the corner. This is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous
in our eyes.

Then shall be sung the Hymn (Trof&r) of the Feast, or of the Saint, or of the
proper Tone for the Sunday {twice); and the Hymn to the Birth-giver of
God (Bogoroditchen) of the same Tone (Appendix A\

Then shall be read the Selection of Psalms appointed (Stikhosldvie Kafismi).

And after the first portion of the Selection shall be said


The Little Litany {M&laya Ekthtiya).

Again, yet again, in peace let us pray to the Lord.

Choir. Lord, have mercy.

Succour us, save us, have mercy upon us, and keep us, O God, by
thy grace.

Choir Lord, have mercy.

Calling to remembrance our most holy, undefiled, most blessed
and glorious Lady, the Birth-giver of God and ever-virgin Mary,
with all the Saints, let us commend ourselves, and each other,
and all our life unto Christ our God.

Choir To thee, O Lord. '

Exclamation.


Priest For thine is the majesty, and thine are the kingdom and
the power and the glory, of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages.

Choir Amen.

Then shall be read the second portion of the Selection of Psalms. And when
it is finished, there shall be said


Again, yet again :
membrance: . . .


The Little Litany.
. Succour us, save us ;

Exclamation.


Calling to re-


Priest. For thou art a good God, who lovest mankind, and unto
thee we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages.

Choir Amen.


*

§


5


£


28 THE ALL-NIGHT VIGIL SERVICE

Then the Holy Door is opened, and the Priest, accompanied by the Deacon (5)
bearing a lighted taper, censeth the Sanctuary, the Holy Images, and the
People, and all the Temple (Polielfy). (6)

And the Poliel£y is sung:

Psalms cxxxv., cxxxvi.

1. Praise ye the Name of the Lord, O ye servants of the Lord Alle-.
luia. {Thrice.)

2. Praised be the Lord out of Zion, who dwelleth at Jerusalem.
Alleluia. ( Thrice. )

3. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious, for his mercy
endureth forever. Alleluia. ( Thrice. )

4. O give thanks unto the God of heaven ; for his mercy endureth
forever. Alleluia. ( Thrice. )


s-s


^


P


And if it be a Great Feast, or other appointed Saint's Day, the proper
OiMt Exaltation * shall be chanted, first by the Priest and the Deacon, and

***t§. then by the Choir, before the Holy Image of the Day, as the Priest censeth

it where it lieth on the folding-stand.

Then shall be sung the Hymns (Tropari), with the Refrain ; but only on the
Lord's Day.

Refrain. Blessed art thou, O Lord : teach me thy statutes.

The company of the Angels was amazed, when they beheld
thee numbered among the dead, yet thyself, O Saviour, destroy-
ing the power of death, and with thee raising up Adam and
releasing all men from Hell IJs

Wherefore, O Women Disciples, do ye mingle sweet-smelling
spices with your tears of t pity? the radiant Angel within the
sepulchre cried unto the Myrrh-bearing Women : Behold the
grave, and understand ; for the Saviour is risen from the tomb. IJs

Very early in the morning did the Myrrh-bearing Women run
lamenting unto thy tomb; but an Angel came toward them,
saying : The time for lamentation is passed ; weep not ; but
announce unto the Apostles the Resurrection, ft

The Myrrh-bearing Women mourned as, bearing unguents,
they drew near thy tomb, O Saviour. But the Angel spake unto
them, saying : Why number ye the living among the dead ? In
that he is God he is risen from the grave, ft

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit

Hymn to the Trinity (Trbitehny).

We adore the Father, as also his Son, and the Holy Spirit, the Holy
Trinity in One Essence, crying with the Seraphim : Holy, holy, holy
art thou, O Lord.

Now, and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

* For Exaltations (or Magnifyings), see the Special Services of the Great Feasts.


a*

£3*

eg
n

v o

r

o


MATINS 29

Hymn to the Sirth-giver of God (Bogorbditcheri).

In that thou didst bear the Giver of Life, O Virgin, thou didst redeem
Adam from sin, and didst give to Eve joy in place of sadness ; and He
who was incarnate of thee, both God and man, hath restored to life
those who had fallen therefrom.

Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to thee, O God. (Thrice.)

. Then the Little Litany.

Deacon. Again, yet again, in peace let us pray to the Lord.

Choir. Lord, have mercy.

Succour us, save us, have mercy upon us, and keep us, O God, by
thy grace.

Choir. Lord, have mercy.

Calling to remembrance our most holy, undefiled, most blessed and
glorious Lady, the Birth-giver of God and ever-virgin Mary, with all
the Saints, let us commend ourselves, and each other, and all our life
unto Christ our God.

Choir. To thee, O Lord.

Exclamation.

Priest. For blessed is thy Name, and glorified is thy kingdom, of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and
unto ages of ages.

Choir. Amen.

Then the Degrees of the Antiphon (Stepinny Antifdni) are sung, according
to the Tone of the week.

Antiphon. Tone IV From my youth up many passions have warred
against me. But do thou succour and save me, O my Saviour.

Ye who hate Zion shall be put to confusion of the Lord ; like grass
in the fire shall ye be withered up.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now, and
ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Through the Holy Spirit is every soul quickened and exalted in
purity, and illumined by the Triune Unity in mystic holiness.

Deacon. Let us attend.

Priest. Peace be with you all.

Deacon. Wisdom ! The Gradual (Prokimen) of the . . . Tone.

The Graduate (Prokimend) in the Eight Tones.

Tone I. : Now will I arise, saith the Lord : I will set myself for salva-
tion, I will make no tarrying therein.

Verse: The words *>f the Lord are pure words.

Tone II: Rise up for me, O Lord, in the judgment that thou hast
commanded. And so shall the congregation of the people come about
thee.

Verse: O Lord my God, I have put my trust in thee : save me.

Tone III: Tell it out among the heathen that the Lord is King, and


30 THE ALL-NIGHT VIGIL SERVICE

that it is he that hath made the round world* so fast that it cannot be
moved.

Verse: O sing unto the Lord a new song.

Tone IV. : Arise, O Lord, and help us, and deliver us, for thy Name's
sake.

Verse: O God, we have heard with our ears.

Tone V. : Arise, O Lord my God, and let thy hand be lifted up, for
thou reignest forever.

Verse: I will confess unto thee, O Lord: with my whole heart, I will
proclaim all thy wondrous works.

Tone VI. : O Lord, stir up thy might, and come and save us.

Verse: Hear, O thou Shepherd of Israel, who leadeth Joseph like a
sheep.

Tone VII : Arise, O Lord, my God, and let thy hand be lifted up :
forget not thy poor forever.

Verse: I will confess unto thee, O Lord: with my whole heart, I will
proclaim all thy wondrous works.

Tone VIIL : The Lord shall reign forever ; thy God, O Zion, from
generation to generation.

Verse: Praise the Lord, O my soul: while I live will I praise the
Lord.

Deacon. Let us pray to the Lord.

Choir. Lord, have mercy.

The Priest cxclaitneih :

For holy art thou, O our God, who restest in the Saints, and unto
thee we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
Spirit, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages.

Choir. Amen.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now, and
ever, and unto ages of ages.

Choir. Amen.

Then the Deacon and the Choir sing ;

Let everything that hath breath praise the Lord. {Four times.)
Verse: Praise ye God in his Saints. Praise him in the firm founda-
tion of his power.

Then the Deacon prociaimeth :

And that he will graciously vouchsafe unto us to hear his Holy Gos-
pel, let us pray to the Lord God.
Choir. Lord, have mercy. {Thrice.)

Deacon, Wisdom, O believers. Let us listen tfc the Holy Gospel.
Priest. Peace be with you all.
The People. And with thy spirit.

Immediately he addeth :
Priest. The Lesson from the Holy Gospel according to N.* (7)

• See Table of the Gospel Lessons, page xix.


MATINS 31

Choir. Glory to thee, O Lord ; glory to thee.
Deacon. Let us attend.

Then the Priest readeth the Holy Gospel.

Choir Glory to thee, O Lord ; glory to thee.

The Choir then sineeth, while the book of the Holy Gospels is laid upon the table
at the centre of the Temple :

In that we have beheld the Resurrection of Christ, let us bow down
before the holy Lord Jesus, the only sinless One. Thy Cross do we
adore, O Christ, and thy holy Resurrection we laud and glorify : for
thou art our God, and we know none other beside thee ; we call upon
thy Name. O come, all ye faithful, let us adore Christ's holy Resur-
rection, For lo, through the Cross is joy come into all the world. Ever
blessing the Lord, let us sing his Resurrection : for in that he endured
the Cross he hath destroyed Death by death.

This Hymn is always sung at the Lcrd's Day Matins, with rare exceptions. It
is sung on Lazarus" s Saturday, and on all week-days from Easter until Ascen-
sion-Bay. (8)

And if it be the Eve of Palm Sunday, Psalm li. is read, and the Priest palnSn-
censeth the Palms. And when it isfinished, he blesseth the Palms. m 4*7«

But if it be the ordinary Vigil Office :

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.

Through the prayers of the Apostles, O Merciful One, blot out the
multitude of our transgressions.

Now, and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Through the prayers of the Birth-giver of God, O Merciful One, blot
out the multitude of our transgressions.

Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy great goodness ;
according to the multitude of thy mercies do away mine offences.

On the Lord's Day :

Jesus, having risen from the grave as he foretold, hath given unto
us life eternal and great mercy.

On Feast Days, instead of this, the Canticles {Stikhiry) of the Feast. pJig™*

Deacon. O Lord, save thy people, and bless thine heritage. Visit
thy world with mercies and bounties. Exalt the horn of Orthodox
Christians, and send down upon us thy rich mercies. Through the in-
tercessions of our all-undefilec} Lady, the Birth-giver of God and ever-
virgin Mary; through the might of the precious and life-giving Cross;
through the protection of the honourable Bodiless Powers of Heaven ;

* See the Service for Blessing the Palms, at end of Service for Palm Sunday (Special
Services).


32 THE ALL-NIGHT VIGIL SERVICE

of the honourable, glorious Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist, John ; of
the holy, glorious and all-laudable Apostles; of our Holy Fathers,
great Hierarchs and (Ecumenical Teachers, Basil the Great, Gregory
the Theologian and John Chrysostom ; of our Holy Father Nicholas,
Archbishop of Myra in Lycia, the Wonder-worker ; of our Holy Fathers
of All-Russia, Wonder-workers, Peter, Alexis, Jonah and Philip ; of
the holy, glorious and right-victorious Martyrs ; of our reverend and
God-fearing Fathers, the holy and righteous Ancestors of God, Joachim
and Anna ; of Saint N. [the holy patron of the Temple) ; and of all
thy Saints, we beseech thee, O most merciful Lord, give ear unto the
petitions of us sinners who make our supplications unto thee, and have
mercy upon us.

Choir Lord, have mercy. {Twelve times.)

Priest Through the mercies and bounties of thine Only-begotten
Son, with whom thou art blessed, together with thine all-holy, and
good, and life-giving Spirit, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages.

Choir. Amen.

The Priest^ the Deacon and the People now salute the Holy Gospels and the Holy
Image of the Feast.

Ogiet And if the bread and wine and oiljtave been blessed during Vespers,

Fm*U. before the Matins, the Priest now anointeth the faithful with the

oily and the bread is distributed. (9)

The Canon of the proper Tone? or of the Feast, is then sung. (10)

After the Third Theme-Song (frmds) the Little Litany (seepage 2g)followeth.

Exclamation.

Priest. For thou art our God, and unto thee we ascribe glory, to
the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and
unto ages of ages.

Choir. Amen.

After the Sixth Theme-Song of the Canon also the Little Litany (seepage 29)
followethy with the Exclamation at the end;

For thou art the King of the world, and the Saviour of our souls, and
unto thee we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Before the Ninth Ode the Magnificat (or the Refrain appointed for Matins on
certain, of the Great Feasts) is sung.

The Deacon cometh and standeth before the Holy Image of the Birth-giver of Goa%
and censing it, he saith ;

The Birth-giver of God and Mother of the Light let us honour and
extol in song.

Choir. My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced
in God my Saviour.

* Set Appendix A.


MATINS 33

Refrain. More honourable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the Seraphim, thou who without defilement barest
God the Word, true Birth-giver of God, we magnify thee.

For he hath regarded the lowliness of his handmaiden ; for behold
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

More honourable than the Cherubim, . . .

For he that is mighty hath magnified me, and holy is his Name; and
his mercy is on them that fear him, throughout all generations. I£

He hath showed strength with his arm ; he hath scattered the proud
in the imagination of their hearts. 1$

He hath put down the mighty from their seat, and hath exalted the
humble and meek. He hath filled the empty with good things, and the
rich hath he sent empty away. $

He remembering his mercy hath holpen his servant Israel, as he
promised to our forefathers, Abraham and his seed forever. I£

Also the Song of Zacharias (Luke i. 68-79).

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he hath visited and redeemed
his people ; and hath raised up a mighty salvation for us, in the house of
his servant David ; as he spake by the mouth of his holy prophets,
which have been since the world began ; that we should be saved from
our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us. To perform the
mercy promised to our forefathers, and to remember his holy covenant ;
to perform the oath which he sware to our forefather Abraham that he
would give us ; that we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies,
might serve him without fear; in holiness and righteousness before him
all the days of our life. And thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of
the Highest, for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare his
ways ! To give knowledge of salvation unto his people, for the remis-
sion of their sins, through the tender mercy of our God, whereby the
day-spring from on high hath visited us : to give light to them that sit
in darkness and in the shadow of death, and to guide our feet into the
way of peace.

The Ninth Ode followeth, and then :

The Little Litany.

Deacon. Again, yet again, in peace let us pray to the Lord.

Choir. Lord, have mercy.

Succour us, save us, have mercy upon us, and keep us, God, by thy
grace.

Choir. Lord, have mercy.

Calling to remembrance our most holy, undefiled, most blessed and.
glorious Lady, the Birth-giver of God and ever-virgin Mary, with all the
Saints, let us commend ourselves, and each other, and all our life unto
Christ our God.

Choir. To thee, O Lord


34 THE ALL-NIGHT VIGIL SERVICE

Exclamation.

Priest For all the powers of heaven praise thee, and unto thee we
ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now, and ever, and unto ages of ages.

Choir. Amen.

The Exapostilarion of the Lord % s Day. (i i)

Verse I : Holy is the Lord our God. ( Thrice.)
Verse 2 : Over all men is our God.

Let everything which hath breath praise the Lord. Praise the Lord
of heaven: praise Him in the height.

Re/rain. To thee, O God, is due our song.

Praise him all ye Angels of his : praise him all his host.

Refrain. To thee, O God, is due our song.

And here begin the Verses (Stikkiry) of the Tone, or of the Feast. And then :

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now,
and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Hymn to the Birth-giver of God (Bogordditchen). (On the Lord's Day
Evening) :

Most blessed art thou, O Virgin Birth-giver of God : For through
him who became incarnate of thee Hell is led captive, Adam is re-
called from the dead, the curse is made void, Eve is set free, Death is
slain, and we have been endowed with life. Wherefore we cry aloud,
extolling in song : Blessed art thou, O Christ our God, in whose sight
it is thus well-pleasing. Glory to thee.

Priest. Glory to thee, who hast shown us the light. (12)

Choir. Glory be to God on high, and on earth peace, good will towards
men. We praise thee, we bless thee, we worship thee, we glorify thee, we
give thanks to thee for thy great glory, O Lord God, heavenly King,
God the Father Almighty. O Lord, the only-begotten Son Jesus Christ,
and the Holy Spirit ; O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father,
that takest away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us. Thou that
takest away the sins of the world, receive our prayer. Thou that sittest
at the right hand of God the Father, have mercy upon us. For thou
only art holy ; thou only art the Lord, thou only, O Jesus Christ, with
the Holy Spirit, art most high in the glory of God the Father. Amen.

Every day will I give thanks unto thee, and praise thy Name for-
ever and ever. Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this day without sin.
Blessed art thou, O Lord God of our fathers, and praised and glorified
be thy holy Name forever. Amen.

Let thy merciful kindness, O Lord, be upon us, as we do put our trust
in thee.

Blessed art thou, O Lord : O teach me thy statutes. (Thrice.)

Lord, thou hast been our refuge from one generation to another.
I said : Lord, be merciful unto me ; heal my soul, for I have sinned


MATINS 35

against thee. Lord, I flee unto thee. Teach me to do the thing that
pleaseth thee ; for thou art my God. For with thee is the well of life,
and in thy light shall we see light O continue forth thyJoving-kind-
ness unto those who know thee.

O Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Immortal One, have mercy upon
us. {Thrice.)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now,
and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

O Holy Immortal One, have mercy upon us.

Then in a loud voice:
O Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Immortal One, have mercy upon us.
Then shall be sung the appointed Hymn of Dismissal.
The Saturday Evening (Sunday) Hymns :
In Tones I., ///., V, VII:

To-day is salvatibn come into the world. Let us sing praises unto
him who rose again from the grave, the Author of our life : For in that
by death he hath destroyed Death, he hath given unto us the victory
and great mercy.

In Tones II, IV, VI, VIII :

When thou hadst risen again from the tomb, and hadst burst the
bonds of Hell, thou didst loose the condemnation of death, O Lord,
redeeming all men from the snares of the enemy. When thou hadst
revealed thyself to thine Apostles, thou didst send them forth to
proclaim thee And through them thou hast granted thy peace unto
the universe, O only All-merciful One.

Then the Augmented Litany (Sug&baya Ektiniyd).
Deacon. Have mercy upon us, O God, according to thy great
mercy, we beseech thee : hearken, and have mercy.
Choir. Lord, have mercy.

Here follow petitions for the Ruler of the Land and for all the Authorities,
(Emperor, or King, and Reigning House, or President, according to the
elements and nationalities of which the Parish is constituted).

Again we pray for our Holy Synod {or Patriarch) ; for our Bishop
{or Archbishop, or Metropolitan), N. ; and for all our brethren in
Christ.

Furthermore we pray for all their Christ-loving Army and Navy. IJ

Furthermore we pray for the blessed and ever-memorable found-
ers of this holy Temple ; and for all our devout fathers and brethren,
Orthodox believers, departed this life before us, who here and in all
the world lie asleep in the Lord. IJs

Furthermore we pray for those who bear fruit and do good works
in this holy and all-honourable Temple ; for those who labour in its
service ; for the singers ; and for the people here present, who await
in firm hope thy great and rich mercies. IJs


P


5*

3.


36


THE ALL-NIGHT VIGIL SERVICE


* cr

c o

>-. o

3.3.


Exclamation.

Priest For thou art a good and merciful God, who lovest mankind,
and unto thee we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages.

Choir. Amen.

Deacon. Let us complete our morning prayer unto the Lord.

Choir. Lord, have mercy.

Succour us, save us, have mercy upon us, and keep us, O God, by
thy grace.

Choir. Lord, have mercy.

A day all-perfect, holy, peaceful and sinless, let us beseech of
the Lord : ft

An Angel of Peace, the faithful guide and guardian of our
souls : ft

The pardon and remission of our sins and transgressions: ft

All things which are profitable to our souls and bodies, and peace
to the world : ft

That we may pass the residue of our life in peace and peni-
tence : ft

A Christian ending to our life, painless, blameless, peaceful ;
and a good defence before the dread Judgment Seat of Christ, ft

Calling to remembrance our most holy, undefiled, most blessed and
glorious Lady, the Birth-giver of God and ever-virgin Mary, with all
the Saints, let us commend ourselves, and each other, and all our life
unto Christ our God.

Choir. To thee, O Lord

Exclamation.

Priest. For thou art the God of mercies and of bounties, and of love
toward mankind, and unto thee we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to
the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages.

Choir. Amen.

Priest. Peace be with you all.

People. And with thy spirit.

Deacon. Let us bow our heads unto the Lord,

Choir. Unto thee, O Lord.

And the Priest saith this Prayer, secretly :

O holy Lord, who dwellest on high, and regardest the humble of
heart, and with thine all-seeing eye dost behold all creation, unto
Thee have we bowed the neck of our soul and body, and we entreat
thee : Stretch forth thine invisible hand from thy holy dwelling-
place and bless us all. And if in aught we have sinned, whether
voluntarily or involuntarily, forgive, inasmuch as thou art a good
God, and lovest mankind; vouchsafing unto us thy earthly and
heavenly good things.


r


MATINS 37

Exclamation,

For thine it is to show mercy and to save us, O' our God, and unto
thee we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
Spirit, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages.

Choir. Amen.

Deacon* Wisdom!

Choir. Bless.

Priest He who in verity existeth, even Christ our God, is blessed
always, now, and ever, and unto ages of ages. [

Choir Amen.

Establish, O Lord, most God-fearing (Emperor, King, or President),
N., and the Holy Orthodox faith, and Orthodox Christians, unto ages
of ages.

Priest Save us, O most holy Birth-giver of God.

Choir. More hpnourable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the Seraphim, thou who without defilement barest
God the Word, in very truth the Birth-giver of God, we magnify thee.

Priest Glory to thee, O Christ our God, our sure hope ; glory to
thee.

Choir Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now, and ever, and unto ages of ages Amen.

Lord, have mercy. {Thrice.) Bless.

Then the Priest bestowetk the Benediction. On Saturday Evening;

May he who rose again from the dead, Christ our true God ; through
the prayers of his most holy Mother, of the holy, glorious and all-
praiseworthy Apostles, and of all the Saints, have mercy upon us and
save us ; inasmuch as he is good and loveth mankind.

Then the Choir singeth the Many Years :

Preserve, O Lord, our (Emperor, or King, and Reigning House, or
President) ; our (Patriarch, or Holy Synod) ; our (Metropolitan, Arch-
bishop, or Bishop), N. ; and all Orthodox Christians, for many years.


The Holy Doors or curtain shall be closed, and The First Hour is then read.
