THE TYPICAL PSALMS*

The beginning of the Typical Psalms shall be said thus .
Bless the Lord, O my soul : blessed art thou, O Lord.

Psalm cm.

Bless the Lord, O my soul ; and all that is within me, bless his holy
name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits : who
forgiveth all thine iniquities, and healeth all thy diseases ; who redeem-
eth thy life from destruction ; who crowneth thee with loving-kindness
and tender mercies ; who satisfieth thy mouth with good things ; so
that thy youth is renewed like the eagle's. The Lord executeth right-
eousness and judgment for all that are oppressed. He made known his
ways unto Moses, his acts unto the children of Israel. The Lord is
merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy. He will
not always chide ; neither will he keep his anger forever. He hath not
dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities.
For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward
them that fear him. As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he
removed our transgressions from us. Like as a father pitieth his chil-
dren, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. For he knoweth our
frame ; he remembereth that we are dust. As for man, his days are as
grass ; as a flower of the field, so he flourisheth. For the wind passeth
over it, and it is gone ; and the place thereof shall know it no more.
But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting, upon them
that fear him, and his righteousness unto children's children ; to such
as keep his covenant, and to those that remember his commandments
to do them. The Lord hath prepared his throne in the heavens ; and his
kingdom ruleth over all. Bless the Lord, ye his angels, that excel in
strength, that do his commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his
word. Bless the Lord, all ye his hosts ; ye ministers of his that do his
pleasure. Bless the Lord all works of his, in all places of his dominion :
bless the Lord, O my soul.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit : The
first Choir, with heightened voices. Now, and ever, and unto ages of
ages : The second Choir.

The First Choir.

Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy
name. Blessed art thou, O Lord.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.

• See Appendix 8, III.


THE TYPICAL PSALMS 59

Psalm cxlvi.

Praise the Lord, O my soul. While I live will I praise the Lord : I
will sing praises unto my God while I have any being. Put not your
trust in princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help. His
breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth; in that very day bis
thoughts perish. Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help,
whose hope is in the Lord his God : which made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that therein is ; which keepeth truth forever : which exe-
cuteth judgment for the oppressed : which giveth food to the hungry.
The Lord looseth the prisoners : the Lord openeth the eyes of the blind :
the Lord raiseth them that are bowed down : the Lord loveth the right-
eous : the Lord preserveth the strangers ; he relieveth the fatherless
and widow : but the way of the wicked he turneth upside down. The
Lord shall reign forever, even thy God, O Zion, unto all generations.

Now, and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

O Only-begotten Son, and Word of God ! Thou who art immortal yet
didst deign for our salvation to become incarnate of the Holy Birth-
giver of God and ever-virgin Mary ; and without change of essence wast
made man ; who also wast crucified for us, O Christ our God, trampling
down Death by death ; who art one of the Holy Trinity and art glori-
fied with the Father and the Holy Spirit : Save us.

In the Great Fast, after the Ninth Hour, and the Prayer^ O Master, Lord Jesus
Christ our God (page 57), we sing, in Tone VIIL :

The Beatitudes.

In thy kingdom remember us, O Lord, when thou coraest into thy
kingdom.
Blessed are the poor in spirit : for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

And if it be the Great Fast, to every verse is added the Refrain : Remember
us, O Lord, when thou comest into thy kingdom.

Blessed are they that mourn : for they shall be comforted. I£
Blessed are the meek : for they shall inherit the earth. I£
Blessed are they that do hunger and thirst after righteous-
ness : for they shall be filled. Tfc
Blessed are the merciful : for they shall obtain mercy. I£
Blessed are the pure in heart : for they shall see God. %
Blessed are the peacemakers : for they shall be called the chil-
dren of God. I£

Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake :
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. I£

Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. I£

Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in
heaven, fy


c 3

Q n
S 3

ft -»
*-■ c

3 Cff


33


60 THE TYPICAL PSALMS

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now,
and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Remember us, O Lord, when thou coniest into thy kingdom.

Remember us, O Master, when thou comest into thy kingdom.

Remember us, O Holy One, when thou comest into thy kingdom.
{And one reverence at each,)

The heavenly choir doth hymn thee, and doth cry, Holy, holy, holy,
Lord God of Hosts : heaven and earth are full of thy glory.

Verse: Come unto him and be enlightened, and your faces shall not
be ashamed.

The heavenly choir doth hymn thee, and doth cry : Holy, holy, holy,
Lord God of Hosts : heaven and earth are full of thy glory.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.

The Choit; of holy Angels and Archangels, with all the Powers of
heaven, sing thy praises and do cry, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of
Hosts : heaven and earth are full of thy glory.

Now, and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

I believe in one God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and
earth, And of all things visible and invisible :

And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, Begot-
ten of his Father before all worlds ; Light of Light, Very God of very
God, Begotten, not made; Being of one Essence with the Father;
By whom all things were made ; Who, for us men, and for our salva-
tion, came down from heaven, And was incarnate by the Holy Ghost
of the Virgin Mary, And was made man. And was crucified also for us
under Pontius Pilate, and suffered and was buried. And the third day
he rose again, according to the Scriptures. And ascended into heaven,
And sitteth on the right hand of the Father. And he shall come again
with glory to judge both the quick and the dead ; Whose kingdom shall
have no end.

And in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of Life, Who proceedeth
from the Father, Who with the Father and the Son together is wor-
shipped and glorified, Who spake by the Prophets. In one Holy Catholic
and Apostolic Church. I acknowledge one Baptism for the remission
of sins. I look for the Resurrection of the dead, And the Life of the
world to come. Amen.

Loose, remit, pardon, O God, our transgressions, voluntary and
involuntary ; whether of word or of deed ; whether of knowledge or of
ignorance ; whether of the day or of the night ; whether of the mind,
or of the intention : Forgive us all, for thou art' good and lovest man-
kind.

Our Father, who art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy king-
dom come. Thy will be done on earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this
day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive those
who trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation ; But deliver
us from the Evil One :


THE TYPICAL PSALMS 61

Priest For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now, and ever, and
unto ages of ages. Amen.

If it be Saturday:

Unto thee, O Lord, the Author of Creation, the universe doth offer
the God-bearing Martyrs as the first-fruits of nature : By whose
prayers, through the Birth-giver of God, do thou preserve in peace
profound thy Church, which is thine estate, O most merciful One.

Collect-Hymn (Konddk) of the Transfiguration.

Thou wast transfigured on the Mount, and in so far as they were able
to receive it, thy disciples, with wonder, beheld thy glory, O Christ our
God And when they beheld thee crucified, they understood thy volun-
tary Passion, and proclaimed unto the world that thou art, of a truth,
the Radiance of the Father.

Collect-Hymns for :

Monday : Hymn xf the Bodiless Powers, Tone II, :

O ye Chieftains of God, servitors of the divine glory, Guides of men

and Captains of the Bodiless Powers : Entreat that which is profitable

for us, and great mercy ; in that ye are the Chieftains of the Bodiless

Powers.

Tuesday: Hymn of the Forerunner, Tone II :
O Prophet of God, and Forerunner of Grace, in that we have found
thy holy head as a most sacred rose budding forth from the earth, we
receive always thy healing. For still, as aforetime in the world, thou
dost preach repentance.

Wednesday and Friday : Tone III :

Do thou who, of thine own good will, upon the cross wast lifted up,
bestow thy bounties upon the new State which is called by thy Name,
O Christ our God ; make glad with thy might our most God-fearing
(Emperor, King, <?r President), N., granting victory over his adversaries
unto him who hath thine aid, which is a panoply of peace, a trophy
invincible.

Thursday : the Holy Apostles, Tone II :

Thou hast received thy steadfast Preachers, God-inspired in speech,
the Crown of thy Disciples, O Lord, into the delights and the repose
of thy blessed ones ; for thou hast accepted their labours and their
death as greater than any whole burnt-offerings, O thou who alone
knowest the secrets of the heart.

The same day : the Collect-Hymn {Konddk) of St, Nicholas, Tone III, :

In Myra, O Saint, wast thou shown forth a sacrificing priest ; for ful-
filling the Gospel of Christ, O Holy One, thou didst lay down thy life


62 THE TYPICAL PSALMS

for thy people, and didst save the innocent from death. For which cause
thou wert proclaimed a Saint, as one deeply initiated into the mys-
teries of the goodness of God.

Then, on every day :

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.
To the souls of thy servants, O Lord, give rest with thy Saints, where
there is neither sickness nor sighing, but life everlasting.

Then immediately, on every day except Saturday, is said:

Now, and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

O Protection of Christians that maketh not ashamed, O Mediatrix
never-failing with the Creator : Despise not the sinners' voice of sup-
plication ; but in that thou art good, come speedily to the aid of us who
faithfully call upon thee ; make haste to our petition and further our
prayer, O Birth-giver of God, who ever protectest them that do thee
honour.

And if it be the Great Fast :

Lord, have mercy. {Eight times.)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now, and
ever, and unto ages of ages'. Amen.

More honourable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more
glorious than the Seraphim, thou who without defilement barest God
the Word, true Birth-giver of God, we magnify thee.

In the Name of the Lord, bless, Father.

Priest God be merciful to us, and bless us, and show us the light
of his countenance, and be merciful unto us.

Then the Prayer op St. Ephraim the Syrian.

O Lord and Master of my life, grant not unto me a spirit of slothful-
ness, of discouragement, of lust of power, of vain babbling. {A great
reverence to the earth.)

But vouchsafe unto thy servant the spirit of continence, of meekness,
of patience, and of love. {Reverence.)

Yea, O Lord and King, grant that I may perceive my own trans-
gressions, and judge not my brother. For blessed art thou unto ages
of ages. Amen. {Reverence. Tfun twelve lesser reverences, saying at
each reverence; O God, cleanse thou me, a sinner. Then the whole
Prayer is repeated, with one great reverence in conclusion.)

Lord, have mercy. ( Twelve times*)

And the Prayer :

O all-holy Trinity, Might one in Essence, Kingdom undivided, Origin
of all good things, be graciously inclined also unto me, a sinner. Es-
tablish thou me ; give understanding unto my heart, and purge away all
my vileness. Enlighten my mind, that I may glorify, sing praises, and


THE TYPICAL PSALMS 63

adore thee, and say : Thou only art holy, thou only art the Lord, O
Jesus Christ, in the glory of the Father. Amen.

Meet is it in very truth to bless thee, O Birth-giver of God, ever-
blessed and all-undefiled One, and the Mother of our God.

Priest Wisdom !

O most holy Birth-giver of God, save us.

Cfroir. More honourable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the Seraphim, thou who without corruption barest
God the Word, true Birth-giver of God, we magnify thee.

Priest. Glory to thee, O Christ God our hope ; glory to thee.

Choir. Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now, and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Lord, have mercy. (Thrice.) Bless.

Then the Benediction.

Priest. May Christ, our true God, through the prayers of his most
holy Mother, and of all the Saints, have mercy upon us and save us ; for
he is gracious and loveth mankind.
